In this video we'll talk a bit about what object oriented programming is all about.
But before we do that let's review procedural programming and its limitations.
Procedural programming is pretty much what we've been doing up to this point in the course.
The focus of procedural programming is the function we modularize our programs by creating many functions
that each specify a process or action in the program.
So procedural programs are basically a collection of functions in procedural programming we declare
our data separate from the functions and then wherever we need to function to process or use our data
we pass in the data to the function.
If you recall our challenge from Section 11 that's exactly what we did.
There's absolutely nothing wrong with procedural programming and in many cases you have to use it since
not all languages support object oriented features procedural programming is also fairly easy to learn
since we're pretty good at breaking up a task into subtasks which is exactly what procedural programming
is all about.
However procedural programming has some limitations one of the limitations with procedural programming
is that the functions need to know about the structure of the data.
This may not sound like a big deal.
But suppose we have a program with hundreds of functions and many of those functions expect a specific
data structure as an argument.
If the structure or format for that data structure being passed around changes then this would affect
many many functions.
These functions might even have to be modified to handle the new format of the data.
This could have a ripple effect in the program and the amount of effort needed to change and then test
all of the updated functions could be substantial.
I've worked on very very large projects where the decision was made not to upgrade a data structure
because the changes needed in the rest of the program would be too expensive in programmer and testing
time.
The real limitation is to procedural programming really begin to show as programs become larger and
more complex as procedural programs get larger and larger they become more difficult to understand since
the number of connections in the program becomes very hard to trace by hand.
This leads to a problem maintaining the software extending the program and finding and fixing bugs.
Also reusing functions and data structures that we wrote for one program in another program becomes
much more difficult since after time we end up with code whose behavior isn't that easy to visualize.
Finally the code becomes more fragile and easier to break.
That means that when we add new functionality or fix a bug.
The chances of introducing another bug is high.
This happens more often than you would think.
And it happens more in large procedural programs than it happens in large object oriented programs.
OK so now let's talk about some of the principal features of object oriented programming.
So what does Object-Oriented Programming all about in this video.
I'm focusing on object oriented programming and its benefits.
We can also have Object Oriented Analysis object oriented design object Torreon testing and so forth.
Object oriented is all about modeling your software in terms of classes and objects.
There's some new jargon to learn along the way but it's not so bad.
Don't worry if it all doesn't click right away we'll be using this new terminology a lot and the rest
of the course.
These classes and objects modeled real world entities in your problem domain.
So if you're writing an application that allows users to store edit and manipulate images like a photo
on a Mac or photos on a PC then your classes might be album photo slide show location and so forth if
you're modeling a student enrollment system your classes might be student course Professor you get the
idea.
Why is this such a big deal and how is it different from procedural programming.
Well first let's talk about why it's such a big deal.
It's all about abstraction as our programs grow more and more complex.
We need ways to deal with the complexity classes and objects are one way to do just that now rather
than thinking in terms of first name last name student ID credit hours and so forth.
We can think in terms of student and all that detail comes along with it.
Not only that but operations like register drop course add chorus and so forth also come along with
it.
So if Frank is an object and it was created from the Student class I can send a message to Frank and
ask Frank if he's registered this term.
This is very different from procedural programming where I would have a function that would tell me
if the student is registered and then I would have to pass a student to that function.
You might ask so what.
It still works in procedural programming and you'd be correct.
But now the function needs to know how to determine if the student is currently registered.
If this business logic changes then we need to figure out everywhere in the program that knows this
so we can update the code in the Object-Oriented solution only the Student class knows this.
So a precise change is all that's necessary.
The fact that objects contain data and operations that work on that data is called encapsulation and
it's an extension of the abstract data type in computer science.
Now the data and the operations are together in the class where they belong and not spread across many
functions each passing of receiving data encapsulation is another mechanism used by object oriented
programming to help us deal with complexity.
We can take the idea of encapsulation even further with information hiding Object-Oriented Programming
allows us to hide implementation specific logic in a class so that it's available only within the class.
This is a super powerful concept since it allows us to provide a public interface to the class and hide
everything else.
Now we know that the user of the class can't mess with the implementation specific code since they never
knew about it in the first place.
That's pretty cool.
This makes the code easier to maintain debug and extend object oriented programming is also all about
reusability re-usability is defined in terms of using something from this program in another program.
Since classes are pretty much encapsulated units of data and operations reusing them in other applications
is much easier and since the class has already been tested we get that benefit as well.
This leads to faster development and better quality software.
Finally you've probably heard about inheritance inheritance allows us to create a new class based on
an existing class by only adding or modifying the elements that we need to be able to create a new class.
For example suppose we have an account class that models a basic bank account so it has a balance and
the regular withdrawn deposit methods.
Now suppose we have the need for a special trust account class and our business logic says that this
type of account is limited to three withdrawals per year and each withdrawal cannot exceed 10 percent
of the current account balance.
We could add this logic to the account class that we already have and have an enumeration or some other
kind of discriminant that determines what type of account we have and then execute the appropriate if
else logic.
Sure that works but what if we expect lots of variations to that account class like a money market account
a CD account and so forth.
And each one of them has its own business logic not only for withdrawal but also for deposit and some
accounts change fees and others produced interest income.
You get the idea this could quickly make that simple account class that we started out with a beast
that no programmer wants to deal with.
In this case we can derive our new class from the existing account class and add the appropriate behavior
in the new class without modifying the original class at all.
This leads to re-usability as well as polymorphic classes since all the derived classes we created are
in fact still accounts.
We'll learn more about the power of polymorphism later in this section.
So 0 sounds pretty amazing right.
Well while I can certainly help us develop large programs that are easier to maintain test debug and
we use components from it's not a panacea.
OA won't make bad code better.
It will likely make it worse.
Also 00 is not suitable for every application and not everything decomposes into a class.
There are sometimes nonfunctional requirements that horizontally cross cut a system and these tend to
add tangled code within existing classes.
Remember if you have a small program that won't be around for any significant amount of time maybe it's
an internal program that you use to automate something then Object-Oriented Programming might be overkill.
A simple procedural or scripting program may be perfectly appropriate generally object oriented programming
has a steep learning curve than procedural programming C++ in particular is considered one of the most
difficult programming languages to learn.
Also there are many Object-Oriented languages out there and while they all support classes and objects
and so forth the way that they support them can be quite different not only syntactically but also in
behavior as mentioned in the beginning of this video.
It usually takes more upfront design time in order to write an object oriented program.
In fact large object oriented programs sometimes go through significant upfront design.
Finally Object-Oriented programs tend to be larger in size than non object oriented programs and can
sometimes be slower and more complex since are so much more going on behind the scenes.
This can be especially true with object oriented languages that use a virtual machine.
However the great news is that among Object-Oriented languages C++ is probably the most efficient language
out there.